---
layout: page
nav_order: 1
title: Color and facet
description: Color and facet
grand_parent: Topics
parent: Income inequality
---

# Jan 30. Exercise: Income inequality by education

[Worked Example](../../assets/slides/4_Income_by_College_WORKED.html){: .btn }

This exercise examines how income inequality has changed over time for
American workers with and without college degrees.

Learning goals for today include

- Create a ggplot with your table group
- Distinguish trends using color and facet
- Communicate the result in a few sentences

We will analyze [byCollege.csv](../assets/data/byCollege.csv), which is described in (2) below.

## 1. Coordinate your group

Our exercise today will involve coding as well as writing
interpretations in English. You should use R to randomize these roles.
On one of your computers, first create a vector with your names.

``` r
names <- c("Name 1","Name 2","Name 3","Name 4")
```

Then, use the `sample` function to assign two names to the object
`chosen`. You can learn about `sample` by typing `?sample` in the
console.

``` r
chosen <- sample(x = names, size = 2)
```

Look at the `chosen` object. The first person will be the coder, and the
second person will be the writer.

## 2. Coding to visualize the data

Everyone should help with these, but the coder will be the one typing
into a .R source file.

The first step (as always) is to prepare your R environment by loading
packages and the data.

``` r
library(tidyverse)
byCollege <- read_csv("https://info3370.github.io/assets/data/byCollege.csv")
```

Now explore the data a bit.

- How many variables are there?
- What class is each variable?

> **Aside.** We want to tell you a bit about how we created this data
> file. You will do things like this in the future.

> We used the Current Population Survey Annual Social and Economic
> Supplement for 1962–2022, accessed through the [Integrated Public Use
> Microdata Series (IPUMS)](https://cps.ipums.org/cps/). In each year,
> we restricted to people employed 50+ weeks in the past year. For each
> worker, we focused on their reported wage and salary income for the
> entire year. We summarized those incomes by the 10th, 50th, and 90th
> percentile of the distribution over all workers (weighted by survey
> weights).

> We did those things so you can jump straight to analysis.

### Analysis: Visualize the data

Create a `ggplot` to show how income changed over time.

- The `x` variable is `year`
- The `y` variable is `income`

There are many trends here! In fact, there are 6 trends for every
subgroup defined by the variables

- `education` (College Degree vs Less than College)
- `quantity` (10th, 50th, and 90th percentiles)

On Friday, we had only one trend. Today, we will extend our `ggplot`
skills to visualize many trends at once. There are two key tools for
doing this.

**Color.** Add the `color` aesthetic to your `ggplot` call. For
examples, see [R4DS
3.3](https://r4ds.had.co.nz/data-visualisation.html?q=facet#aesthetic-mappings).
You could either use `color = education` or `color = quantity`.

**Facets.** We can also distinguish trends by separating our plot into
many panels, called facets. See [R4DS
3.5](https://r4ds.had.co.nz/data-visualisation.html?q=facet#facets).

Using some combination of color and facets, visualize

- how the 10th, 50th, and 90th percentiles of the income distribution
  changed over time
- for those with and without a college degree

## 3. Interpretation to communicate the result

Discuss what you see. Where did change occur over time?

Now it is the **writer’s** turn. As your group discusses, come to a
consensus about how you would explain what a reader should take away
from your figure. What information is shown to them? Write a few
sentences.

## Important: Save your code and your writing!

In our next class meeting, we will take what you did in this class and
turn it into a more formal and reproducible report.

## Summary video: What we covered today

{% include youtube.html id="mJlBFfoj-lc" %}
