---
layout: page
nav_order: 6
title: Using weights
description: Using weights
grand_parent: Topics
parent: Income inequality
---

# Using weights

Surveys often **oversample** some subgroups in order to make subpopulation estimates in those subgroups. For example, in the CPS

- The goal is to estimate unemployment in each state
- They need enough sample size in each state, even the small ones

As a result, the probability of being in the sample is higher for those residing in states with small populations.

<details>
<summary>
<b>An example: California and Wyoming</b>
</summary>
<p style="margin-left: 40px">
In 2022, California had 14,822 ASEC respondents out of a population of 39,029,342. Wyoming had 2,199 ASEC respondents out of 581,381 residents. The average probability that a CA resident was sampled was about 0.04 percent, whereas the same probability in WY was 0.4 percent. You are <b>10 times</b> more likely to be sampled for the ASEC if you live in Wyoming.
</p>
</details>

## How oversamples affect data analysis

Oversamples are great for subgroup estimates. But for national-level estimates, they can mess us up if we are not careful. In this case, we need to down-weight respondents from Wyoming and up-weight respondents from California.

### How much to upweight? Inverse probability of sampling

Weights tell us how many people a given observation represents. To calculate sampling weights, take the 1 / (Probability this person was chosen in the sample). In practice, weighting is more complicated than this because survey administrators also adjust weights for differential nonresponse across population subgroups (a method called post-stratification).

<details>
<summary>
<b>Example redux: California and Wyoming</b>
</summary>
<p style="margin-left: 40px">
Suppose Californians are sampled with probability 0.0004. Then each Californian represents 1 / 0.0004 = 2,500 people. Each Californian should receive a weight of 2,500. Working out the same math for Wyoming, each Wyoming resident should receive a weight of 250. The total weight on these two samples will then be proportional to the sizes of these two populations.
</p>
</details>

## Exercise: Creating a weighted.quantile() function

We will let survey administrators create weights. But we need to be able to use them, and R does not have a canned function for weighted quantiles. We will write one!

Write a function that accepts three arguments

- `x`, a numeric vector
- `q`, a numeric value for the quantile to be estimated
- `w`, a numeric vector of sampling weights

Your function will look something like this

```
weighted.quantile <- function(x, q, w) {
	# Carry out operations on x, q, w
	# Produce an estimate
	return(estimate)
}
```

### Simulated data

As you work on your function, you might want some simple simulated data to practice with. You can generate data with the code below.

```
library(tidyverse)sim <- data.frame(x = runif(100)) %>%  mutate(w = sqrt(x))
```

### Tips: Possible function structure

To produce the estimate, you might consider the following steps:

1. Create a data frame with these variables
2. Arrange the data frame by the values of x. See `arrange()`
3. Create a new column `cdf` for the cumulative distribution function
    * Calculate the cumulative sum of weight at each observation. See `cumsum()`
    * Calculate the total sum of the weight. See `sum()`
    * Divide the cumulative sum by the total sum
4. Filter to the first case where `cdf > q`
5. Return the `x` value of that case

