---
layout: page
nav_order: 2
title: A prediction task
description: A prediction task
grand_parent: Topics
parent: Opportunity
---

# Class exercise: Predicting income mobility

[Slides](../../assets/slides/prediction_challenge.pdf){: .btn }

In this exercise, we will explore the degree to which survey respondents' incomes in adulthood can be predicted given information on their education and socioeconomic characteristics of their parents and grandparents.

This document introduces the data and then your task.

## Accessing data

Visit the [exercise page](https://www.openicpsr.org/openicpsr/project/185941/version/V2/view) on OpenICPSR. You will need to register for an account and agree to terms. Download [for_students.zip](https://www.openicpsr.org/openicpsr/project/185941/version/V2/view?path=/openicpsr/185941/fcr:versions/V2/for_students.zip&type=file).

## About the data

The [Panel Study of Income Dynamics](https://psidonline.isr.umich.edu/) (PSID) began in 1968 with a representative sample of U.S. households. Since then, the study has repeatedly interviewed these individuals and their descendants. The PSID is uniquely positioned to help us answer questions about income mobility over 3 generations: grandparents, parents, and respondents. We will refer to these as generations g1, g2, and g3.

## Your task

Your task is to predict respondent's incomes.

- to build your model, using `learning.csv`
- make predictions for the cases in `holdout_public.csv`

You can use any statistical or machine learning approach you want. For ideas, see the next pages!

You can also use any or all of the predictors provided in `learning.csv`:

- respondent sex
- respondent education
- parent and grandparent education
- parent and grandparent log income
- grandparent's race

For the purpose of this exercise, we have constructed each log income variable to be the log of mean income across all surveys conducted with the person at age 30--45.
     
The data also contain identifiers:

- g1_id identifies grandparents (multiple rows have the same grandparent)
- g2_id identifies parents (multiple rows have the same parent)
- g3_id identifies respondents (each row is a unique respondent)

## How to submit

You will submit

- your predictions in a .csv file with two columns
    * `g3_id` for each case in `holdout_public`
    * `g3_log_income` with your prediction for each case
- your .R code file

Submit predictions in this [Google form](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSeCXspOpSiM5ScYHhbVx9TIbtHjtMbNUbm9T076NZsIP8ng4A/viewform?usp=sf_link)

