---
layout: page
nav_order: 6
title: ML exercise
description: ML exercise
grand_parent: Topics
parent: Interventions
---

# Machine learning estimators of causal effects. Exercise

This exercise uses causal forests to find effect heterogeneity using real-world experimental data. These methods were developed in [Wager & Athey 2018](https://doi.org/10.1080/01621459.2017.1319839) and generalized in [Athey, Tibshirani, & Wager 2019](https://www.jstor.org/stable/26581894). Those papers are very technical---if you want to learn more about application of this method, we would recommend the [tutorial page](https://grf-labs.github.io/grf/articles/grf_guide.html) for the accompanying `grf` software package for R.

``` r
# loading relevant packages
library(tidyverse)
library(haven)
library(grf)
```

## Why are randomized controlled designs useful for estimating causal effects?

In an observational study, the people who receive treatment and do not
receive treatment may differ in many ways long before treatment occurs.
When the treatment is randomized, the two groups are the same in
expectation along all variables up until the treatment. Differences that
arise after the treatment can therefore be understood to be caused by
the treatment; therefore, researchers can estimate causal treatment
effects on the outcome without concerns about confounding.

## Example: fee-waiver effect on naturalization rates for low-income immigrants

> Hainmueller, Jens et al. 2018. A randomized controlled design reveals
> barriers to citizenship for low-income immigrants. PNAS 115:939-944.
> [https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1714254115.](https://www.pnas.org/doi/epdf/10.1073/pnas.1714254115)

Researchers have suggested that eligible immigrants who desire
citizenship face many hurdles including the cost of the citizenship
application, language barriers, and others.

This study tests the effect of offering a voucher for the naturalization
application fee on naturalization rates for low-income lawful permanent
residents who are eligible to apply for citizenship. They use a
randomized controlled design in which they randomly assign a voucher
that removes the financial barrier and pays for the application fee.

The authors used simple OLS to model the conditional average treatment
effects in different subpopulations, but we are going to use a causal
forest to estimate these effects.

Access the data
**[here](https://dataverse.harvard.edu/dataset.xhtml?persistentId=doi:10.7910/DVN/W7MNXK)**.
The code below will prepare these data for one of the authors’ analyses.

``` r
nny <- read_dta("nny_replication_data_deidentified.dta")

dat_replied <- nny %>%
  filter(outcome == "registered") %>% # only participants of voucher study
  select(-c(treatfw, starts_with("treat_"), ocdistance)) %>% # cols for voucher study
  group_by(ocblock) %>%
  mutate(ocblock_means = mean(winners)) %>%
  ungroup() %>%
  mutate(group_weights = (1/ocblock_means) * winners + (1/(1-ocblock_means))*(1-winners)) %>%
  filter(replied == 1) # in paper, only reported results from respondents who answered yes
```

## a) Step 1: Setup and training a causal forest

1.  Set up your arguments:

- `X` is a matrix containing the **covariates**: `gender_f`, `educ_HS`,
  `educ_somecollege`, `educ_BA`,`lang_Eng`,`lang_Span`,
  `marital_married`, `marital_single`, all of the variables containing
  country of origin, `age`, `hhinc_cap`, and `yrs_greencard`
- `Y` is a vector containing the **outcome**: `submitted`
- `W` should be a vector containing the **treatment**: `any_voucher`
- `sample.weights` is a vector containing the weights given to each
  sample in estimation: `group_weights`

``` r
# Step 1: set up the arguments

X <- as.matrix( dat_replied %>% select(gender_f, educ_HS, educ_somecollege, 
                                       educ_BA,lang_Eng, lang_Span, 
                                       marital_married, marital_single, 
                                       starts_with("origin"), age, 
                                       hhinc_cap, yrs_greencard) )

Y <- dat_replied %>%
  select(submitted) %>%
  as_vector() %>%
  unname()

W <- dat_replied %>%
  select(any_voucher) %>%
  as_vector() %>%
  unname()

group_weights <- dat_replied %>%
  select(group_weights) %>%
  as_vector() %>%
  unname()
```

2.  Use `causal_forest()` to estimate the forest. Store the model in a
    variable called `estimated_forest`.

``` r
# Step 2: estimate the forest

set.seed(1) # make results reproducible

estimated_forest <- causal_forest(X = X,
                                  Y = Y,
                                  W = W,
                                  sample.weights = group_weights)
```

3.  Use `predict()` to estimate the treatment effects for all
    observations in `dat_replied`. Store the results in a vector called
    `tau.hat`.

``` r
# Step 3: predict the treatment effect for all observations

tau.hat <- predict(estimated_forest)$predictions
```

## b) Step 2: Estimating causal effects in different subgroups

Find the average treatment effect for the entire population using the
`average_treatment_effect()` function. Find the conditional average
treatment effect for different subgroups of interest using the `subset`
argument. What surprises you?

``` r
# average treatment effect for population

ate <- average_treatment_effect(estimated_forest)

# finding conditional average treatment effects in different subgroups

ate.male <- average_treatment_effect(estimated_forest, 
                                     subset = X[,"gender_f"] == 0)
ate.female <- average_treatment_effect(estimated_forest, 
                                       subset = X[,"gender_f"] == 1)

# do this for any other subgroup of interest to you!
```

## c) Step 3: Visualizing Conditional Average Treatment Effects

Create a plot of the heterogeneous conditional average treatment effects
in different subpopulations of interest. Try using the standard error to
include confidence intervals. For which subgroups does the voucher have
the largest effect on the naturalization rate? Why might this be
important?